Convert tactics chapter to prodn, part 2 (#16498)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proof-engine/tactics.rst

      apply Rmp.

.. todo PR the following title isn't the greatest.  Perhaps more like "trivial tactics"

>    or "simple tactics"???

Reviewer: Simple tactics or Basic tactics would probably be appropriate titles for the entire chapter actually. Let's discuss this separately from this PR.

   for any unresolved variables rather than failing.  Typically this happens when
   using a ``%`` intropattern (see :n:`@simple_intropattern`).

.. tacn:: clear {| {? {? - } {+ @ident } } | @natural }

   Erases hypotheses from the context of the current goal, provided that they are

>    not referenced directly or indirectly from the remaining hypotheses or the goal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   not dependencies of the remaining hypotheses or the goal.
```

or something similar.

Author: I will tweak, but note that "dependencies of the remaining hypotheses" gets the relationship backward.  A dependency of H is something that H uses.

Reviewer 2: If I have `a : A` in the context and my goal is `P a`, then isn't `a` a dependency of the goal?

Author: I made it:

   Erases hypotheses from the context of the current goal, provided that the
   remaining hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or indirectly on the
   erased hypotheses.

Reviewer 2: Looks good, but I think you can drop the "directly or indirectly".

Author: It's for the benefit of beginners.

>    That means the hypotheses will no longer be shown and can no longer be

Reviewer 2: "no longer appear in the context"

   used in the proof.

   If no arguments are given, all hypotheses are erased except for the ones the

>    goal depends on.  If the goal depends on all hypotheses, the context is left

Reviewer 2: Isn't the latter sentence a special case of the former?

   unchanged.  Otherwise, the specified hypotheses and all hypotheses that

>    depend on them that the goal doesn't depend on are erased.

Reviewer 2: The wording here is a bit hard to read. Perhaps "depend on them which the goal"?

   Specifying `-` erases all hypotheses except those listed.

>    .. todo arguably, "clear -" should be the syntax for removing all unreferenced goals

Reviewer 2: Or arguably `clear *`.

      instead of "clear".

   .. exn:: @ident is used in the conclusion.
      :undocumented:

   .. exn:: @ident is used in the hypothesis @ident.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: clearbody {+ @ident }

      This tactic expects :n:`{+ @ident}` to be :term:`local definitions <context-local definition>`
      and clears their respective bodies.
      In other words, it turns the given definitions into assumptions.

      .. exn:: @ident is not a local definition.

>          :undocumented:

Reviewer 2: Is this really undocumented if it is self-explanatory?

Author: That's a Sphinx directive.  It's not seem by the user. If there's no paragraph after the exn Sphinx reports an error.

   for any unresolved variables rather than failing.  Typically this happens when
   using a ``%`` intropattern (see :n:`@simple_intropattern`).

.. tacn:: clear {? {? - } {+ @ident } }

   clear
   clear ident ...

>    clear - ident ...

Reviewer: What is this?

Author: My outline to revise the description.

   Erases hypotheses from the context of the current goal, provided that the
   remaining hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or indirectly on the
   erased hypotheses.
   That means the hypotheses will no longer appear in the context and therefore
   can't be used in subsequent proof steps.

   :n:`clear`

>      All hypotheses are erased.  This may leave the context unchanged; this form never fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     All hypotheses that can be erased are erased.  This may leave the context unchanged; this form never fails.
```

Or:

```suggestion
     All hypotheses are erased except those that the goal depends on.  This may leave the context unchanged; this form never fails.
```

Author: The paragraph just above says "Erases hypotheses ... provided that the remaining hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or indirectly on the erased hypotheses."  I didn't want to repeat that wordy statement in each of the items and I couldn't think of something more succinct that could be repeated.  "All erasable hypotheses are erased"?  "All hypotheses will be erased if possible"?

Reviewer: "All erasable hypotheses are erased" sounds good to me.

Author: Ah, it sounds like a tautology.

   :n:`clear {+ @ident }`

>      Erases the named hypotheses.

Reviewer: This form fails if some named hypotheses cannot be erased. We should move the two error messages that are shown in the form below here.

   :n:`clear - {+ @ident }`

>      Erases all hypotheses that are not named by(ass) the :n:`@ident`\s.

Reviewer: What is "(ass)"?

It seems to me that the previous description was clearer and should be reused / adapted:

>This variant clears all the hypotheses except the ones depending in the hypotheses named :n:`{+ @ident}` and in the goal.

In particular, this form too can leave the goal unchanged and will never fail.

Author: > What is "(ass)"?

Pretty funny??  A vulgar anatomical term?  I have no idea.  Maybe my cat walking on the keyboard?  Except I don't have a cat.

> In particular, this form too can leave the goal unchanged and will never fail.

It can fail if there's no hypothesis matching `@ident`.

     All hypotheses are erased.  This may leave the context unchanged; this form never fails.

   :n:`clear {+ @ident }`
     Erases the named hypotheses.

   :n:`clear - {+ @ident }`
     Erases all hypotheses that are not named by(ass) the :n:`@ident`\s.

   .. exn:: @ident is used in the conclusion.
      :undocumented:

   .. exn:: @ident is used in the hypothesis @ident.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacv:: clear {+ @ident}

      This is equivalent to :n:`clear @ident. ... clear @ident.`

   .. tacv:: clear - {+ @ident}

      This variant clears all the hypotheses except the ones depending in the
      hypotheses named :n:`{+ @ident}` and in the goal.
   .. tacn:: clearbody {+ @ident }

   .. tacv:: clear

      This variants clears all the hypotheses except the ones the goal depends on.

>    .. tacv:: clear dependent @ident

Reviewer: Where has the documentation of `clear dependent` gone?

Author: I couldn't find a definition in the mlgs and it's an Ltac definition.  Where is the tactic defined?

Reviewer: Here: https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/e72849358f760f55b4dea5311d8ea63e3f90f825/theories/Init/Tactics.v#L232

>    Moves the specified hypotheses
>    (possibly defined) to the goal, if this respects dependencies. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Moves the specified hypotheses and local definitions
   to the goal, if this respects dependencies. This is
```

>       .. todo PR: is this the inverse of :tacn:`clear dependent`?

Reviewer: No. It's still the inverse of `intros` but with a very specific list of arguments.

.. tacn:: move @ident__from @where

   .. insertprodn where where

   .. prodn::
      where ::= at top
      | at bottom
      | before @ident
      | after @ident

   Moves a hypothesis :n:`@ident__from` and hypotheses that directly or indirectly
   refer to :n:`@ident__from` that appear between :n:`@ident__from` and :n:`@ident`.
   `at top` and `at bottom` are
   equivalent to giving the name of the first or last hypotheses in the context.  The
   dependent hypotheses will appear after :n:`@ident__from`, appearing in dependency order.
   This lets users show and group hypotheses in the order they prefer.  It doesn't
   change the goal or the proof term.

>    Perhaps confusingly, "before" and "after" are interpeted with respect to the direction

Reviewer: Perhaps worth putting in a note or a warning so that people notice it?

         Goal forall x :nat, x = 0 -> forall y z:nat, y=y-> 0=x.

      .. coqtop:: out

           intros x Hx y z Hy.

      .. coqtop:: in

           (*                    x Hx y z Hy *)
           move y after z.  (*    x Hx z y Hy   (z was left of y, intuitive case) *)
           Undo.
           move z after y.  (*    x Hx z y Hy   (z was right of y, see Note above) *)
           Undo.
           move x after Hy.  (*   y z Hy x Hx   (Hx depends on x, so moved) *)
           Undo.
           move x before Hy.  (*  y z x Hx Hy *)
           Undo.
           move Hy after Hx.  (*  x y Hy Hx z *)
           Undo.
           move Hy before Hx.  (* x Hx y Hy z *)

.. tacn:: rename {+, @ident__1 into @ident__2 }

   Renames hypothesis :n:`@ident__1` into :n:`@ident__2` for each pair of :n:`@ident`\s.
   Renaming is done simultaneously, which permits swapping the names of 2 hypotheses.
   (Note that the renaming is applied in the context and the existential
   variables, but the proof term doesn't change.)

   .. exn:: @ident is already used.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: set @one_term {? @as_name } {? @occurrences }
          set @bindings_with_parameters {? @occurrences }

>    :name: set; _

Reviewer: Actually, I suggest reversing the order of the two forms. The second one is the most generic and most common one and the second one could be described as just a shorthand for `set (@ident := @one_term) {? @occurrences }` (where `@ident` is auto-generated in case it was not provided).

Author: I think I got all you suggestions, please take a look at the result.

Reviewer: Looks perfect!

   .. insertprodn bindings_with_parameters bindings_with_parameters

   .. prodn::
      bindings_with_parameters ::= ( @ident {* @simple_binder } := @term )

      .. todo PR: Should bindings_with_parameters be
            just binding_with_parameters (singular "binding")?
            Or maybe call it "function_binding"??

>          Also, not much description of "simple_binder", which appears in tacn:fix

Reviewer: Yes, it should be singular. No, it shouldn't be called `function_binding`, because this is not specific to functions (case with no `simple_binder`). Perhaps a better name would actually be `define_alias` or `definition_with_bindings` if we think that recalling the option to provide `simple_binder`(s) is important enough to be in the name (I don't think so).

`simple_binder` should probably be moved, either here or directly to https://coq.gitlab.io/-/coq/-/jobs/3116018580/artifacts/_build/default/doc/refman-html/language/core/assumptions.html#binders, given that this is just a syntactical restriction of what is defined in this section.

Author: > Perhaps a better name would actually be define_alias or definition_with_bindings if we think that recalling the option to provide simple_binder(s) is important enough to be in the name (I don't think so).

I think you meant "renaming" rather than "recalling".  The latter means "remembering".  I didn't fully understand the rest of your thought.  How about `alias_definition` (starting with a noun whereas `define_alias` starts with a verb)?

Reviewer: No, I didn't mean "renaming".

`alias_definition` sounds good to me.

   The first form replaces :n:`@one_term` in the goal with a fresh variable
   and adds the variable as a new :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`.
   Use :n:`@as_name` to specify the name of the new variable.

   The second form is equivalent to

>    :n:`set (@ident := fun {* @simple_binder } => @one_term) …`.

Reviewer: This is a circular definition: a special case of the second form (with `simple_binder`) is defined in terms of another case of the second form (without `simple_binder`), without the latter being defined at all.

BTW, the `one_term` should be `term` here.

>    If :token:`term` has holes (i.e. subexpressions of the form “`_`”), the

Reviewer: `term` or `one_term` (second or first form). This note applies to both.

           Undo.
           move x after Hy.  (*   y z Hy x Hx   (Hx depends on x, so moved) *)
           Undo.
           move x before Hy.  (*  y z x Hx Hy *)
           Undo.
           move Hy after Hx.  (*  x y Hy Hx z *)
           Undo.
           move Hy before Hx.  (* x Hx y Hy z *)

.. tacn:: rename {+, @ident__1 into @ident__2 }

   Renames hypothesis :n:`@ident__1` into :n:`@ident__2` for each pair of :n:`@ident`\s.
   Renaming is done simultaneously, which permits swapping the names of 2 hypotheses.
   (Note that the renaming is applied in the context and the existential
   variables, but the proof term doesn't change.)

   .. exn:: @ident is already used.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: set @alias_definition {? @occurrences }
          set @one_term {? @as_name } {? @occurrences }
   :name: set; _

   .. insertprodn alias_definition as_name

   .. prodn::
      alias_definition ::= ( @ident {* @simple_binder } := @term )
      simple_binder ::= @name
      | ( {+ @name } : @term )
      as_name ::= as @ident

   The first form adds a new local definition
   :n:`@ident := fun {* @simple_binder } => @term` and replaces :n:`@term` in

>    the goal with a new variable :n:`@ident`.

Reviewer: Maybe worth starting with the case with no simple_binder so that readers don't think that a `fun` will be introduced in this case?

   .. todo PR above: should be replaces term with @ident followed by the binding values

>       Perhaps you could provide a simple example?

Reviewer: That's a good question. According to this test:

```coq
Goal forall n, n = 0.
intros.
pattern n. (* without this tactic, the next one will not replace anything in the goal *)
set (f x := x = 0).
```

`set` does not do any advanced replacement. What it replaces by `ident` is any syntactical occurrence of `fun {* @simple_binder } => @term` in the context.

   The second form is equivalent to :n:`set (@ident := @one_term) {? @occurrences }`
   using :n:`@ident`, if present, or auto-generated if not provided.

   If :token:`term` or :token:`one_term` has holes (i.e. subexpressions with the
   form “`_`”), the tactic first checks that all subterms matching the pattern
   are compatible before doing the replacement using the leftmost subterm
   matching the pattern.

   .. exn:: The variable @ident is already declared.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: eset @alias_definition {? @occurrences }
             eset @one_term {? @as_name } {? @occurrences }
      :name: eset; _

      Similar to :tacn:`set`, but generates an existential variable when
      a variable can't be instantiated instead of failing.
      In practice, this is relevant only when :tacn:`eset` is
      used as a synonym of :tacn:`epose`, i.e. when the :token:`term` does
      not occur in the goal.

.. tacn:: remember @one_term {? @as_name } {? eqn : @naming_intropattern } {? in @goal_occurrences }

   Equivalent to :n:`set (@ident := @term) in *` but uses :term:`Leibniz equality`
   instead of a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`.

>    Use :n:`@naming_intropattern` to name or split up the new equation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Use :n:`@naming_intropattern` to name the new equation.
```

Since it's just a naming intropattern, it can't do more than naming...

   .. tacn:: eremember @one_term {? @as_name } {? eqn : @naming_intropattern } {? in @goal_occurrences }

      Similar to :tacn:`remember`, but generates an existential variable when

>       a variable can't be intantiated rather than causing the tactic to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      a variable can't be instantiated rather than causing the tactic to fail.
```

.. tacn:: pose @one_term {? @as_name }
          pose @alias_definition
   :name: pose; _

   Adds a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>` to the current context
   without performing any
   replacement in the conclusion or hypotheses.  In the first form,
   the binding :n:`( @ident … := @term )` adds :n:`@term` with the name :n:`@ident`.
   The second form, :n:`@one_term` with the name either given in :n:`@as_name` or
   chosen by Coq.  It is equivalent to :n:`set (@ident := @term) in |-`.

   :n:`alias_definition`
     This form is shorthand for creating local function definitions.
     :n:`pose ( @ident := fun {* @simple_binder } := @term )` is equivalent to

>      :n:`pose ( @ident := fun {* @simple_binder } => @term)`

Reviewer: I suggest similar changes in the order of the forms and the description to what you did for `set`.

The note on the equivalent form with `set` makes me realize that we didn't describe the `@occurrences` clause in `set`. Yet, it is very important, since it allows restricting where the term will be replaced by the new variable. FTR, the old doc said "This notation allows specifying which occurrences of :token:`term` have to be substituted in the context.".

Author: I changed the order, but I think it's better to point to `set` rather than repeat similar wording. i.e. this is the entire description:

```
   Similar to :n:`set`.  Adds a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`
   to the context but without doing any replacement.
```

           Undo.
           move x before Hy.  (*  y z x Hx Hy *)
           Undo.
           move Hy after Hx.  (*  x y Hy Hx z *)
           Undo.
           move Hy before Hx.  (* x Hx y Hy z *)

.. tacn:: rename {+, @ident__1 into @ident__2 }

   Renames hypothesis :n:`@ident__1` into :n:`@ident__2` for each pair of :n:`@ident`\s.
   Renaming is done simultaneously, which permits swapping the names of 2 hypotheses.
   (Note that the renaming is applied in the context and the existential
   variables, but the proof term doesn't change.)

   .. exn:: @ident is already used.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: set @alias_definition {? @occurrences }
          set @one_term {? @as_name } {? @occurrences }
   :name: set; _

   .. insertprodn alias_definition as_name

   .. prodn::
      alias_definition ::= ( @ident {* @simple_binder } := @term )
      simple_binder ::= @name
      | ( {+ @name } : @term )
      as_name ::= as @ident

   The first form adds a new local definition.  If :n:`@simple_binder` is not
   specified, the added definition has the form :n:`@ident := @term` and otherwise
   :n:`@ident := fun {* @simple_binder } => @term`.  Then the tactic replaces

>    :n:`@term` with a new variable :n:`@ident` in the goal or as specified by

Author: How about this?  It seems wordy to repeat the ```:n:`@ident := fun {* @simple_binder } => @term` ```

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/194107395-404f4544-3035-4990-8f25-b567ac10f1ed.png)

>    :n:`@term` with a new variable :n:`@ident` in the goal or as specified by

Reviewer: LGTM

.. tacn:: clear {? {? - } {+ @ident } }

   Erases *unneeded* hypotheses from the context of the current goal.  "Unneeded"

>    means that the unselected hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or

Author: I wanted to distinguish selected and erased because they are different notions.
"remaining" meaning remaining after what?  After erasure?  That's a circular definition.

I changed this one:

```
   :n:`clear - {+ @ident }`
     Selects all hypotheses that are not named by the :n:`@ident`\s, then
     erases those that are unneeded.
```

OK?

>    means that the unselected hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or

Reviewer: IMHO this formulation is complex and it is not completely obvious what is meant. OTOH, I don't have more ideas to propose so maybe let's keep what you did.

>    means that the unselected hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or

Author: The double negation ("not named" and "unneeded") make a harder to understand than usual, but I think it is correct and precise.  I suppose one could add an example, but that I think that's too much.

.. tacn:: clear {? {? - } {+ @ident } }

   Erases hypotheses from the context of the current goal, provided that the
   remaining hypotheses and the goal don't depend directly or indirectly on the
   erased hypotheses.
   That means the hypotheses will no longer appear in the context and therefore
   can't be used in subsequent proof steps.

   :n:`clear`
     All hypotheses are erased.  This may leave the context unchanged; this form
     never fails.

   :n:`clear {+ @ident }`
     Erases the named hypotheses.

      .. exn:: @ident is used in the conclusion.
         :undocumented:

      .. exn:: @ident is used in the hypothesis @ident.
         :undocumented:

   :n:`clear - {+ @ident }`
     Erases all hypotheses that are not named by the :n:`@ident`\s.  This may
     leave the context unchanged; this form never fails if the

>      :n:`@ident`\s name hypotheses in the context1299.

Reviewer: Looks like some garbage appeared on this line. BTW, I think we should really clarify one way or another that this does not erase hypotheses that depend on named hypotheses.

.. tacn:: assert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          assert ( @ident := @term )
          assert @one_type {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: assert; _; _

   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal before
   it to prove the hypothesis.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3`
   is specified, it applies that tactic to fully prove the new subgoal (and
   otherwise fails).

   The first form adds a new hypothesis named :n:`@ident` of type :n:`@type`.
   (This corresponds to the cut rule of sequent calculus.)

   The second form is equivalent to :n:`assert (@ident : @type) by exact (@term)` where
   :n:`@type` is the type of :n:`@term`.  It is also equivalent to using
   :tacn:`pose proof`. If the head of :n:`@term` is :n:`@ident`, the tactic
   is equivalent to :tacn:`specialize`.

   In the third form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds the
   hypothesis :n:`@one_type` with a fresh name.  Otherwise, it transforms the
   hypothesis as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses
   and goals.  See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   .. exn:: The term "@type" has type "@type__1" which should be Set, Prop or Type.

>       Occurs when the argument :n:`@type` (in the first form) or :n:`@one_term`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Occurs when the argument :n:`@type` (in the first form) or :n:`@one_type`
```

   :n:`@one_type` as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   The :n:`@as_ipat` may also expand the current subgoal into multiple subgoals.
   Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is applied to and must succeed on all
   of them.

   .. tacn:: eenough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eenough @one_type {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eenough; _

      Unlike :tacn:`enough`, the :n:`@type` and :n:`@one_type` in
      :tacn:`eenough` may contain :term:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely until you start to use
      the hypothesis or later start to prove the statement.

.. tacn:: cut @one_type

   Implements the non-dependent case of the :ref:`App <app_rule>` typing rule,
   the Modus Ponens inference rule.  It is equivalent to
   :n:`enough (@ident: @one_type). revert @ident.`
   This tactic is generally considered obsolete but it is still widely
   used in old scripts.

.. tacn:: pose proof @term {? @as_ipat }
          pose proof ( @ident := @term )
   :name: pose proof; _

>    The first form behaves like :n:`assert @type {? @as_ipat } by exact @term`
>    where :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term`.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be:
```suggestion
   The first form behaves like :n:`assert (@type) {? @as_ipat } by exact @term`
   where :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term`.
```
or:
```suggestion
   The first form behaves like :n:`assert @one_type {? @as_ipat } by exact @term`
   where :token:`one_type` is the type of :token:`term`.
```
?

   Similar to :tacn:`set`.  Adds a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`
   to the context but without doing any replacement.

   .. tacn:: epose @alias_definition
             epose @one_term {? @as_name }
      :name: epose; _

      Similar to :tacn:`pose`, but instead of failing because of uninstantiated
      variables, generates existential variables for them.

.. todo: the following title seems inappropriate.  How about something
   more like "Introducing new hypotheses", as in adding arbitrary terms rather
   than transformations of existing terms??  But then I think the tactics in the
   previous section (set, remember, pose, maybe decompose) should be moved into
   this section.  But maybe hard to make the section seem like an crisp, intuitive grouping.
   I can do the moving that after we've reviewed all the text.  WDYT?

   See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/16498#discussion_r989928078

.. _controllingtheproofflow:

Controlling the proof flow
------------------------------

.. tacn:: assert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          assert ( @ident := @term )
          assert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: assert; _; _

>    Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a
>    new subgoal to prove the hypothesis.  The new subgoal becomes
>    the first in the list of subgoals.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3`

Reviewer: I realize only now that there might be a misunderstanding with this "becomes the first in the list of subgoals". If it happens that there are several goals in focus and `assert` is applied to the second one (with `2:`), then, the new subgoal is inserted just before the subgoal applied was to, and does not become the first in the list of subgoals. Maybe to avoid this misunderstanding, it would be better to say, adapting what you did for `enough`:
```suggestion
   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal before
   it to prove the hypothesis.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3`
```

Author: Got it.

IIUC, this seems like something that could be mostly described in proof context section, e.g. the subgoals resulting from applying a tactic to a goal will appear together in the context where the goal was.  If the tactic adds additional subgoals, they are usually added after the modified goal.  OTOH, this behavior is obvious and almost subliminal, but very noticeable if it's not done that way.

   and goals.  See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   .. exn:: The term "@type" has type "@type__1" which should be Set, Prop or Type.

      Occurs when the argument :n:`@type` (in the first form) or :n:`@one_term`
      (in the third form) is not of type :g:`Prop`, :g:`Set` nor :g:`Type`.

   .. exn:: Proof is not complete.
      :name: Proof is not complete. (assert)

      :n:`@ltac_expr3` was not able to prove the new hypothesis.

   .. tacn:: eassert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eassert ( @ident := @term )
             eassert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eassert; _; _

      Unlike :tacn:`assert`, the :n:`@type`\s, :n:`@term`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eassert` may contain :gdef:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting to
      prove it.

.. tacn:: enough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          enough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: enough; _

   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal to prove the

>    hypothesis.

Reviewer: I didn't mean that we should not talk about the location on the new subgoal at all, though :grin: What about:
```suggestion
   hypothesis (*after* the current subgoal).
```

Author: How about:

   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal **after it**
   to prove the hypothesis.

I could also say "immediately after" because "after" is not very specific, e.g. it could mean adding after the last of N subgoals.

Reviewer: > Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal **after it**
> to prove the hypothesis.

LGTM

> I could also say "immediately after" because "after" is not very specific, e.g. it could mean adding after the last of N subgoals.

IMHO there is no risk of misinterpretation since a tactic cannot insert goals anywhere else than the goal it was applied on (and it is not the role of the documentation of individual tactics to remind that). So "after" seems clear enough.

   The first form adds a new hypothesis :n:`@ident : @type`
   and :n:`@type` as the new subgoal.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3` is
   specified, it applies that tactic to prove the current subgoal

>    (and otherwise fails).

Reviewer: For clarity (we are not trying to prove the current subgoal unchanged):

```suggestion
   with the added hypothesis (and otherwise fails).
```

   In the second form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds a new
   hypothesis :n:`@one_term` with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms
   :n:`@one_term` as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   The :n:`@as_ipat` may also expand the current subgoal into multiple subgoals.
   Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is applied to and must succeed on all
   of them.

   .. tacn:: eenough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eenough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eenough; _

      Unlike :tacn:`enough`, the :n:`@type`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eenough` may contain :term:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you

>       avoid specifying the asserted statement completely until you later
>       start to prove it.

Reviewer: In fact, the holes in the asserted statement may very well be resolved before we start to prove it by the use we make of it, so what about:
```suggestion
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely until you start
      to use it or later start to prove it.
```

Author: the "it" you suggest adding refers to the statement or the existential variable?

I don't know what specifically "use" refers to.  Can we be a little more specific without too much discussion?

Reviewer: I meant the statement, but to be more specific, the added hypothesis of the asserted statement.

Does that make clearer what "use" refers to?

Author: I put this:

This lets you avoid specifying the asserted statement completely until you start to use
the hypothesis or later start to prove the statement.

I'm not sure _how_ you start using the hypothesis, but I won't concern myself with that for now.  Ignorance is bliss :-)

Reviewer: > I'm not sure _how_ you start using the hypothesis

With a tactic, like `apply` or `rewrite`.

.. tacn:: cut @one_term

   Implements the non-dependent case of the :ref:`App <app_rule>` typing rule,
   the Modus Ponens inference rule.  It is equivalent to
   :n:`enough (@ident: @one_term). revert @ident.`
   This tactic is generally considered obsolete but it is still widely
   used in old scripts.

.. tacn:: pose proof @term {? @as_ipat }
          pose proof ( @ident := @term )
   :name: pose proof; _

   The first form behaves like :n:`assert @type {? @as_ipat } by exact @term`
   where :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term`.

   .. Théo notes it's odd that the first form uses @term instead of @one_term

   The second form is equivalent to :n:`assert (@ident := @term)`.

   .. tacn:: epose proof @term {? @as_ipat }
             epose proof ( @ident := @term )
      :name: epose proof; _

      While :tacn:`pose proof` expects that no existential variables are generated by
      the tactic, :tacn:`epose proof` removes this constraint.

> .. tacn:: specialize @one_term_with_bindings {? as @simple_intropattern }

Reviewer: Should use `@as_ipat`, since it is equivalent.

Author: I'll change this one.  `{? as @simple_intropattern }` also appears in the `functional induction`, `inversion_sigma` and `soft functional induction`.  It makes sense to standardize such common elements when there's useful description at the common point (`@as_ipat` in this case).  Otherwise, it seems a bit more readable to skip the extra indirection and make immediately apparent that `as` is a literal value.  OTOH, doing this systematically for a bunch of these could be quite a few edits in `common.edit_mlg`, though maybe the mlgs could be refactored for consistency.

Reviewer: Yes, I agree with everything you said.

FTR, when I initially saw `as_ipat` in this chapter, I first considered suggesting splicing it, but then I noticed that it was so commonly used that it made sense to have a common description.

   :name: specialize

>    .. todo PR: Where is @ident now?  Need to adapt

Reviewer: What is referred to by `ident` here is the head constant of `@one_term_with_bindings`. Technically, it is not limited to `ident`, a `qualid` is supported here (and even forms where there is no head constant, but I'm not exactly sure how it works in this case).

Reviewer 3: When the head term is a lambda the binders are generalized over in the new hypothesis.  So `specialize (fun x y => H y x)` will swap the arguments of `H`.  I believe in other cases (headed by global constant, headed by `match`, etc) `specialize` will either error, or else act as either `pose proof` or `generalize`, though I don't recall which.  Can someone check?

Reviewer: No, if the head is a global constant, it behaves as documented, i.e., close to `pose proof` except that it adds a premise to the goal if no `as` clause is provided.

Reviewer 3: Ah, I guess that's why I couldn't recall if it was like pose proof or generalize; it's in between.  How confident are we that this behavior is intended rather than a bug in the code?  (Also, I expect global constants are handled the same way as things that are neither constants nor lambdas.  Though I guess I don't know whether or not let ins are reduced.)

Reviewer: > How confident are we that this behavior is intended rather than a bug in the code?

A long time ago, it was quite common to add a premise to the goal (see elim and co.), so I would be surprised that this was not intentional.

           Undo.
           move H0 before H.

.. tacn:: rename @ident__1 into @ident__2
   :name: rename
.. tacn:: rename {+, @ident__1 into @ident__2 }

   This renames hypothesis :n:`@ident__1` into :n:`@ident__2` in the current

>    context. The name of the hypothesis in the proof-term, however, is left

Reviewer: You think this note is not worth keeping?

Author: Missed it.  But I don't see why it isn't renamed in the proof term, too.  That seems like poor usability, just one more thing that may unnecessarily confuse users.  Worth filing an issue?

Reviewer 2: I mean since it is in the proof term, users will not see it. Only if they inspect `Show Proof` will they seen that it has in fact not changed.

Author: Users at times do look at the proof term.  Unless it's technically too difficult, it should be consistent.

Reviewer: > Worth filing an issue?

I guess you could open an issue or a Zulip topic to at least ask whether it's worth changing.

   .. exn:: The variable @ident is already defined.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: eset @bindings_with_parameters {? @occurrences }
             eset @one_term {? @as_name } {? @occurrences }
      :name: eset; _

      .. insertprodn as_name as_name

      .. prodn::
         as_name ::= as @ident

      Similar to :tacn:`set`, but generates an existential variable when

>       a variable can't be instantiated instead of failing.

Reviewer 2: Here the wording is a little confusing. I think it should be `existential variable can't be instantiated` rather than just variable, since what we are thinking about is a hole like `_`.

Perhaps saying "incomplete term" would be more accurate.

Author: Can you suggest a complete sentence?  Probably should include holes in the explanation.

Reviewer 2: ```
Similar to :tacn:`set`, but generates an existential variable when
      a variable can't be instantiated instead of failing.
```
to
```
Similar to :tacn:`set`, but leaves existential variables if they cannot be instantiated instead of failing.
```

Author: How about something like:

```
      Similar to :tacn:`set`, but instead of failing because of uninstantiated
      variables, generates existential variables for them.
```

I'd prefer "unbound" over "uninstantiated" but we have messages such as "Unable to find an instance for the variable m."  Maybe that's not the best wording, WDYT?

Also we two distinct concepts here: "variable" and "existential variable".  Readers may miss that detail.

Reviewer 2: Bound has a distinct meaning when it comes to variables however. It is about the name and scope of a variable. I don't think using bound is a good idea.

I'm in favor of perhaps talking about existential variables as "holes". But this will have to be adopted more universally in the refman.

Author: Holes (`_`) in terms are distinct from existential variables (`?x`) so we shouldn't conflate the two concepts.  Holes can't appear in the context.  Muddying things a bit is that `_` is used for several things.

      In practice, this is relevant only when :tacn:`eset` is
      used as a synonym of :tacn:`epose`, i.e. when the :token:`term` does
      not occur in the goal.

.. tacn:: remember @one_term {? @as_name } {? eqn : @naming_intropattern } {? in @goal_occurrences }

   Equivalent to :n:`set (@ident := @term) in *` but uses :term:`Leibniz equality`
   instead of a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`.
   Use :n:`@naming_intropattern` to name or split up the new equation.

   .. tacn:: eremember @one_term {? @as_name } {? eqn : @naming_intropattern } {? in @goal_occurrences }

      Similar to :tacn:`remember`, but generates an existential variable when

>       a variable can't be intantiated rather than causing the tactic to fail.

Reviewer 2: Similar comment to above.

Author: Also in `epose`.  I probably should mention the `e*` tactics as a group (`eapply` et al) in the existential variables section.

Author: I need to better understand when `e*` tactics introduce existential variables.  Look at the `eapply` in [this example](https://coq.gitlab.io/-/coq/-/jobs/3115218600/artifacts/_build/default/doc/refman-html/language/extensions/evars.html#automatic-resolution-of-existential-variables).  For `le_lt_trans`, it looks like `n < p` is unified with the goal and m is a new unbound variable, not unified, so it becomes an existential variable.  But I don't quite see why an EV must be introduced for `lt_irrefl` that requires introducing an existential variable.  Is it always related to some variable that's still unbound after unification (for all `e*` tactics)?

`Lemma le_lt_trans n m p : n <= m -> m < p -> n < p.`
`Theorem lt_irrefl : forall n, ~ (n < n).`

Reviewer: Recall that `~ (n < n)` is defined as `n < n -> False`. In this proof, `lt_irrefl` is applied to a goal that is `False`. The conclusion of the lemma is unified to the goal, but that doesn't tell us which value `n` should be instantiated with. That's why the existential variable is introduced.

Author: I added a short section on `e*` tactics, which states "A number of tactics have companion tactics that create existential variables when a new, unspecified variable is added to the context rather than failing."

However, I think "when a new, unspecified variable is added to the context" is fairly vague.  It isn't very clear for `eintros`, and I have trouble imagining how the other `e*` tactics would create existential variables.  Perhaps you could provide a few terse examples that I could include or generalize from?  If there are precise, understandable rules I'd like to state them.

PS It took me 15 minutes to figure out how to invoke `Nat.lt_trans`, which is actually defined in `NZorder.v` and is available when you import `Arith`.  `Require Import Nat.` doesn't do the trick.  How do users know to import `Arith`??  `Search " _ > _"` is also underwhelming--off the top of my head, maybe you should be able to highlight part of the context and get a list of theorems that could be applied to it (taking into account whether it's the goal or a hypothesis that's highlighted).

Reviewer: Note that I don't suggest using my example above (too convoluted). My impression is that what you wrote is already better than nothing. We should just highlight two tactics of the `e` set that are special:
- `eassumption` which resolves existential variables (which `assumption` refuses to do)
- `eauto` which internally uses `simple eapply` and `eassumption` but will not (usually) leave any existential variables (unless you do some advanced stuff with external hints).

We could also note (but maybe not worth) that since `constructor`, `exists`, `left`, `right`, `split` and `transitivity` are all just variants of `apply`, the same holds true for their `e` variants which are variants of `eapply`.

Author: Now "A number of tactics have companion tactics that create existential variables
when the base tactic would fail because of unbound variables."

I added a few words to `eassumption` and `eauto`.  Not motivated to fix the wording for every `e*` tactic in this PR.

> I don't know how people know. People just learn early on to do Require Import Arith and nothing else.
>
> Yes, Search could use lots of improvements. Plenty of work to do in this direction.

BTW, after we're done with this PR, I'd like to chat about starting a list of the most important improvements we'd like to see in Coq.

Reviewer: >Now "A number of tactics have companion tactics that create existential variables
when the base tactic would fail because of unbound variables."

Maybe use "uninstantiated" instead of "unbound"?

Author: In the standard library, only the following are used: eapply eassert eassumption eauto econstructor edestruct enough (3 places) eexact (8 places) eexists epose erewrite esplit etransitivity

Not used: ecase ediscriminate eelim einduction einjection eintros eleft eremember eright eset esimplify_eq

>    .. exn:: The variable @ident is already defined.

Reviewer: It looks like the actual error message is:
```suggestion
   .. exn:: The variable @ident is already declared.
```

   :name: assert; _

   The first form adds a new hypothesis named :n:`@ident` containing :n:`@term` and
   creates a new subgoal, which becomes the first in the list of subgoals
   remaining to prove.  (This corresponds to the cut rule of sequent calculus.)

   The second form adds a new hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq
   or specified by :n:`@as_ipat`.  If :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is
   applied to the new subgoal.

   :n:`@as_ipat`
     Gives the name for the hypothesis or specifies how to split it into parts.
     See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   :n:`by @ltac_expr3`
     Applies :n:`@ltac_expr3` to solve the subgoal generated by :n:`assert`.

     If not specified, the tactic applies `exact @term` by default where
     :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term` and also equivalent to
     :tacn:`pose proof`.  If the head of term is :token:`ident`, the tactic
     is equivalent to :tacn:`specialize`.

   .. exn:: Not a proposition or a type.

      Arises when the argument :token:`type` is neither of type :g:`Prop`,
      :g:`Set` nor :g:`Type`.

   .. exn:: Proof is not complete.
      :name: Proof is not complete. (assert)

>       :undocumented:

Reviewer 2: This happens when somebody does
```
assert (x : P) by tactic.
```
the idea is that it doesn't produce a goal, so if tactic doesn't solve `P` then it gives this error.

   .. exn:: Variable @ident is already declared.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: eassert ( @ident : @term ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          eassert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: eassert; _

   While the different variants of :tacn:`assert` expect that no existential
   variables are generated by the tactic, :tacn:`eassert` removes this constraint.

>    This lets you avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention that the existential variables introduced can be found as shelved goals?

Author: I added a hyperlink to the definition of "existential variable".  To [here](https://coq.inria.fr/distrib/current/refman/language/extensions/evars.html#term-existential-variable).

AFAICT, the only way to see the list of existential variables is with "Show Existentials" (mentioned at the link).  The link should probably mention some other obvious operations that seem to be missing (or I just don't recall them).
- Is there a tactic to shelve or unshelve a specific item by name?
- It's odd to have an `Unshelve` command; it seems like it should be `unshelve` with no tactic name

Reviewer 2: I believe existentials with user given names can be accessed directly with the goal selectory. So you could `Unshelve` all the goals and then `shelve` the existential you want using the goal selector. I am not 100% certain how to do it however.

   this section.  But maybe hard to make the section seem like an crisp, intuitive grouping.
   I can do the moving that after we've reviewed all the text.  WDYT?

.. _controllingtheproofflow:

Controlling the proof flow
------------------------------

.. tacn:: assert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          assert ( @ident := @term )
          assert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: assert; _; _

   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a
   new subgoal to prove the hypothesis.  The new subgoal becomes
   the first in the list of subgoals.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3`
   is specified, it applies that tactic to fully prove the new subgoal (and
   otherwise fails).

   The first form adds a new hypothesis named :n:`@ident` of type :n:`@type`.
   (This corresponds to the cut rule of sequent calculus.)

   The second form is equivalent to :n:`assert (@ident : @type) by exact (@term)` where
   :n:`@type` is the type of :n:`@term`.  It is also equivalent to using
   :tacn:`pose proof`. If the head of :n:`@term` is :n:`@ident`, the tactic
   is equivalent to :tacn:`specialize`.

>    In the third form, Coq chooses fresh name for the hypothesis if :n:`@as_ipat`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the third form, Coq chooses a fresh name for the hypothesis if :n:`@as_ipat`
```

Also: clarify that the hypothesis is `one_term` here. It corresponds to the `type` in the first form, but it needs parentheses around and we do not have a `one_type` grammatical token, otherwise I would suggest using it.

Author: > it needs parentheses around

Ah, where exactly?  I already have them in the second form: `exact (@term)`.

Reviewer: I'm explaining why the third form uses a `one_term` and not a `type` here.

Author: See the updated text.  If your comment still applies, would you suggest a specific change?

>    isn't specified.  Otherwise, it transforms the type
>    of :n:`@term` as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   isn't specified.  Otherwise, it transforms the hypothesis as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
```

There is no "type of term" that should be discussed here. `one_term` is the hypothesis (see my comment above).

   See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   .. exn:: The term "@type" has type "@type__1" which should be Set, Prop or Type.

>       Arises when the argument :token:`type` is neither of type :g:`Prop`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Arises when the argument :token:`type` (first form) or :token:`one_term` (third form) is neither of type :g:`Prop`,
```

             eassert ( @ident := @term )
             eassert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eassert; _; _

      Unlike :tacn:`assert`, the :n:`@type`\s, :n:`@term`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eassert` may contain :term:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting to
      prove it.

.. tacn:: enough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          enough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: enough; _

   .. todo PR The only difference vs assert is where the goal is added?  If so, then
      this entry should only refer to assert and mention the difference(s).
      There are several similar tactics in this section.  Maybe we should add a
      summary of their differences?  Perhaps you could briefly outline them?

   The first form adds a new hypothesis :n:`@ident : @type` to the context
   and adds :n:`@type` as a new subgoal after the current goal (rather than
   before it as :tacn:`assert` would).  If present, :n:`@ltac_expr3` must solve the

>    initial goal entirely after the extra assumption :n:`@type` is added and possibly
>    destructed; otherwise, the tactic will fail.

Reviewer: If this first paragraph remains solely about the first form, then there is no possible destructuring of the extra assumption:
```suggestion
   initial goal entirely after the extra assumption :n:`@type` is added; otherwise, the tactic will fail.
```

Author: Ah, destructing is not relevant to the tactic at all?

Reviewer: Destructuring can only happen if there is an intropattern (so the second form).

Author: "destructuring" and not "destructing"?  If it's something the intropattern does, then no need to use one of those terms here.  RIght?

Reviewer: >"destructuring" and not "destructing"?

Might be a Frenchism again. In French, we have "destructurer" and "détruire", but they probably in fact correspond to "destruct" and "destroy". So "destructing" is probably the right term.

> If it's something the intropattern does, then no need to use one of those terms here. RIght?

Right.

>    In the second form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds a new

Reviewer: I'm generally OK with this description, except that now that the first paragraph only talks about the first form, this means that the second form is under-specified. There is a lot of content from the first paragraph that still applies to the second form, but it is the reader's job to guess.

Author: How about this?  I chose to describe `@ltac_expr3` in two places rather than in the first paragraph because `@as_ipat` only applies to the second form.

```
   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a new subgoal to prove the
   hypothesis.  The new subgoal appears immediately after the current goal in
   the list of subgoals.

   The first form adds a new hypothesis :n:`@ident : @type`
   and :n:`@type` as the new subgoal.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3` is
   specified, it applies that tactic to fully prove the current subgoal
   (and otherwise fails).

   In the second form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds a new
   hypothesis :n:`@one_term` with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms
   :n:`@one_term` as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   The :n:`@as_ipat` may also expand the current subgoal into multiple subgoals.
   Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is applied to and must succeed on all
   of them.
```

Reviewer: LGTM. I would just not be that explicit about "immediately after the current goal in the list of subgoals" because a tactic can only create subgoals in the location of the goal it was applied on, so there would be no way that this was inserted later in the list of subgoals. But that's OK if you prefer to keep it.

Author: OK, dropped the "immediately" sentence.

>    hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms :n:`@type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms :n:`@one_term`
```

   as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   If the :n:`as @simple_intropattern` clause generates more than one subgoal,
   :n:`@ltac_expr3`, if present, is applied to all of them.

   .. tacn:: eenough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eenough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eenough; _

      Unlike :tacn:`enough`, the :n:`@type`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eenough` may contain :term:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you

>       avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting to
>       prove it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely.
```

The issue with the last part of the sentence is that it may suggest that the next step is to prove the asserted statement, whereas in the case of `enough`, the next step is normally to prove that this additional hypothesis is enough (thus the tactic name) to prove the initial goal.

      like :g:`and` and :g:`exists` and those defined with the :cmd:`Record`
      command.

.. todo PR: the following title seems inappropriate.  How about something
   more like "Introducing new hypotheses", as in adding arbitrary terms rather
   than transformations of existing terms??  But then I think the tactics in the
   previous section (set, remember, pose, maybe decompose) should be moved into
   this section.  But maybe hard to make the section seem like an crisp, intuitive grouping.

>    I can do the moving that after we've reviewed all the text.  WDYT?

Reviewer: Yes, having `set`, `remember` and `pose` closer to the `pose proof`, `specialize`, et al. tactics would make sense, but I can also explain the current logic.

The tactics under the "Controlling the proof flow" logic are the ones which act on logical objects (propositions, which may be hypotheses or subgoals). One thing to note is that the tactics like `assert`, `enough`, `pose proof` or `specialize` are never required to complete a proof. They just allow to have a better control over how the proof is structured, to produce more readable proofs and to follow more closely the mathematical reasoning.

I don't have an alternative title that comes to mind right now, nor would I in case we moved `set`, `pose` and `remember` here. Maybe the solution is to also rethink the title of the previous section (if it were to stop after `rename`).

I propose to defer this question to after we've completed the review process for this PR (maybe something else worth talking about in a call).

Controlling the proof flow
------------------------------

.. tacn:: assert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          assert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }

>    :name: assert; _

Author: I have no recollection, I will re-add.

   The first form adds a new hypothesis named :n:`@ident` of type :n:`@type`.
   If :n:`by @ltac_expr3` is not provided, the tactic creates a new subgoal

>    to prove this hypothesis, which becomes the first in the list of subgoals.

Author: Looking at `assert True`, it appears the subgoal becomes the first one in the context.  From `assert (True /\ False) by split`, it appears the new hypothesis must be fully proven by the ltac_expr3.

I added this as the first paragraph for assert:

   Adds a new hypothesis to the current subgoal and a
   new subgoal to prove the hypothesis.  The new subgoal becomes
   the first in the list of subgoals.  Then, if :n:`@ltac_expr3`
   is specified, it applies that tactic to fully prove the new subgoal (and
   otherwise fails).

and revised the rest a bit.

   (This corresponds to the cut rule of sequent calculus.)

   In the second form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds a new
   hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms :n:`@type`
   as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   This is equivalent to :n:`assert (@ident : @type) by exact @one_term` where
   :token:`type` is the type of :token:`one_term`.  It is also equivalent to using
   :tacn:`pose proof`. If the head of :n:`@one_term` is :token:`ident`, the tactic
   is equivalent to :tacn:`specialize`.

   :n:`@as_ipat`
     Specifies how to transform :n:`@type` before adding one or more new
     hypotheses.  See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   :n:`by @ltac_expr3`
     Applies :n:`@ltac_expr3` to solve the subgoal generated by :n:`assert`.

   .. exn:: The term "@type" has type "@type__1" which should be Set, Prop or Type.

      Arises when the argument :token:`type` is neither of type :g:`Prop`,
      :g:`Set` nor :g:`Type`.

>    .. exn:: Proof is not complete.

Author: It looks a bit busy if I indent it.  I could reorder the exns without the indent.  WDYT?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/194375377-a3277c0e-dc36-4b0b-8b5a-7a85385e6d0b.png)

>    .. exn:: Proof is not complete.

Reviewer: It looks fine to me, but do as you prefer.

>    .. exn:: Proof is not complete.

Author: I did something else.

      :name: Proof is not complete. (assert)

      :n:`@ltac_expr3` was not able to prove the provided :n:`@term` or :n:`@one_term`.

   .. tacn:: eassert ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eassert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eassert; _

      .. todo PR Need a better spot to define and comment on holes.
         Maybe that could be in the existential variables chapter,

>          but making clear that they are existential variables?

Author: I added a little to that section.  Really covering the topic seems like it requires a good bit of research and is beyond the scope of this PR.

      Unlike :tacn:`assert`, the :n:`@type`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eassert` may contain :gdef:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting to
      prove it.

.. tacn:: enough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          enough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: enough; _

   .. todo PR The only difference vs assert is where the goal is added?  If so, then
      this entry should only refer to assert and mention the difference(s).
      There are several similar tactics in this section.  Maybe we should add a

>       summary of their differences?  Perhaps you could briefly outline them?

Reviewer: The location of the goal when `by @ltac_expr3` is not provided, and how this clause applies when it is provided. (And also there is no `(@ident := @term)` form here.)  I honestly think that your current description is pretty good and already relates to `assert` sufficiently.

Author: I strongly prefer describing things in terms of differences rather than repeating similar text.  Less to read and wonder whether minor wording differences are significant or not.  No need to mention that assert has one more form, that should be pretty apparent.

The part about "possibly destructed" also applies to `assert`?

Author: By the way, this seems like a bug:

```
enough (True /\ True) by split; apply I.
(*
in Tactics.check_number_of_constructors:
Not an inductive goal with 1 constructor.
*)
```

Reviewer: > The part about "possibly destructed" also applies to `assert`?

It doesn't because `ltac_expr3` and the intropattern are not applied to the same subgoal in the case of `assert` (contrary to `enough`).

Since you want to describe them in terms of difference, here is my summary of the differences:

- The simple case is when none of `ltac_expr3` and `as_ipat` are provided. In this case, the tactics both create a subgoal corresponding to the initial goal with the added hypothesis and a subgoal asking to prove the hypothesis. The only difference is the order (`assert` asks to prove the hypothesis first, and `enough` last).
- When `as_ipat` is provided, it is applied to the initial goal with the added hypothesis. But some patterns may create multiple subgoals, so in this case, the tactics may leave more than 2 subgoals. Only one of them corresponds to the hypothesis to prove, the rest of the subgoals will correspond to the initial goal with the added hypothesis after its possible transformations.
- When `by @ltac_expr3` is provided, it applies to the subgoal(s) that the tactic puts first, so that's the (unique) subgoal asking to prove the hypothesis in the case of `assert` and the (possibly several) subgoal(s) corresponding to the initial goal where the hypothesis has been added (and possibly transformed) in the case of `enough`. Given that this close requires to solve entirely the subgoal(s) on which it is applied, a consequence is that `enough ... as ... by ...` will never leave more than one subgoal, whereas `assert ... as ... by ...` may leave several.

> By the way, this seems like a bug:
> 
> ```
> enough (True /\ True) by split; apply I.
> (*
> in Tactics.check_number_of_constructors:
> Not an inductive goal with 1 constructor.
> *)
> ```

I cannot reproduce your exact error message without knowing the context, but what you observe is probably a parenthesis issue: you need to put parentheses around `split; apply I`. This is why this is an `ltac_expr3`.

Author: If it has 6 legs, it's a bug :-)
```
Goal False.
enough (True /\ True) by (split; apply I).
(*
in Tactics.check_number_of_constructors:
Not an inductive goal with 1 constructor.
*)
```

However this works: `assert (True /\ True) by (split; apply I).` as does `enough (0 = 0 /\ 1 = 1) by (split; reflexivity).`

Author: Which one does "It's" refer to?  See Zulip.

Author: The "by" clause should apply to the goals created by assert/enough, not the entire context.  Otherwise, it adds no functionality: you could split off the by clause as a separate right after the assert/enough.

Author: If you look in `g_tactic.mlg`, assert, enough, pose and their e* variants all invoke `TacAssert` with varying parameters.  The second parameter is false only for [e]enough, not for the others.  The code for processing the tactic is in `tacinterp.ml` (`| TacAssert (ev,b,t,ipat,c) ->`, but it seems to recursively refer to TacAssert and for some reason I can't find the ultimate definition.  So can't find the code to handle that second parameter.

Reviewer: > Which one does "It's" refer to? See Zulip.

It refers to "the same things".

>The "by" clause should apply to the goals created by assert/enough, not the entire context.

A subset of the goals yes. I don't get what you are asking.

> If you look in `g_tactic.mlg`, assert, enough, pose and their e* variants all invoke `TacAssert` with varying parameters. The second parameter is false only for [e]enough, not for the others. The code for processing the tactic is in `tacinterp.ml` (`| TacAssert (ev,b,t,ipat,c) ->`, but it seems to recursively refer to TacAssert and for some reason I can't find the ultimate definition. So can't find the code to handle that second parameter.

For a tactic that I use a lot and whose behavior I know and understand pretty well, I'm a bit reluctant to spend time figuring out how the code works TBH.

Author: > It's behaving normally.

I think not, but let's consider these simpler examples instead.  In the first one, the `by` clause applies only to the new goal `True`, as I would expect.  In the second, the `by` clause is applied to (at least) the original goal `False`, which seems like a bug to me.  IIUC the point of having the `by` clause is to apply it only to (some of?) the goal given in the tactic.  If not, how do I describe this behavior in the doc?

```
Goal False. assert True by apply I. (* works, still have "False" goal *)
Goal False. enough True by apply I. (* Unable to unify "True" with "False". *)

Author: Or are you saying that `enough one_term by tactic.` is equivalent to `enough one_term. tactic.`, which means that the `by` doesn't add any functionality?

Reviewer: > Or are you saying that `enough one_term by tactic.` is equivalent to `enough one_term. tactic.`, which means that the `by` doesn't add any functionality?

Precisely.

Reviewer: `by` never adds any functionality AFAICT, it is always a way of clarifying that you can solve the side-goals that are generated with the provided tactic. So it makes for a much clearer and readable script.

Reviewer: And obviously `enough one_term as [|] by tactic.` is not equivalent to `enough one_term as [|]. tactic.` but as `enough one_term as [|]. 1-2: tactic.`

Reviewer: I disagree with calling that "no added functionality" BTW, otherwise where is the limit where you consider something a functionality? I could push your reasoning and say that no tactic is useful beyond `exact` since I can prove everything by providing the proof term directly.

Reviewer: > IIUC the point of having the `by` clause is to apply it only to the goal given in the tactic. If not, how do I describe this behavior in the doc?

The point of the `by` clause is to discharge side-goals. The main difference between `assert` and `enough` is that the user does not consider the side-goal to be the same. That's a choice that the user makes when writing the proof script. The side-goal is shown first and it will be sometimes put inside focusing braces, or if it can be solved quickly a `by` clause will be used.

Author: > I disagree with calling that "no added functionality" BTW

I think you're over analyzing a simple observation.

   The first form adds a new hypothesis :n:`@ident : @type` to the context
   and adds :n:`@type` as a new subgoal after the current goal (rather than
   before it as :tacn:`assert` would).  If present, :n:`@ltac_expr3` must solve the
   initial goal entirely after the extra assumption :n:`@type` is added and possibly
   destructed; otherwise, the tactic will fail.

   .. todo PR: must succeed for all subgoals and if no, the tactic fails?

>       and applies to assert, too?

Reviewer: Yes. For `assert`, `ltac_expr3` is always applied only on one subgoal (which it must solve completely).

   In the second form, if :n:`@as_ipat` isn't specified, the tactic adds a new
   hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq.  Otherwise, it transforms :n:`@type`
   as specified by :n:`@as_ipat` and adds the resulting new hypotheses.
   If the :n:`as @simple_intropattern` clause generates more than one subgoal,
   :n:`@ltac_expr3`, if present, is applied to all of them.

   .. tacn:: eenough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
             eenough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
      :name: eenough; _

      Unlike :tacn:`enough`, the :n:`@type`\s and :n:`@one_term`\s in
      :tacn:`eenough` may contain :term:`holes <hole>`, denoted by :n:`_`,
      for which the tactic will create existential variables.  This lets you
      avoid specifying the asserted statement completely before starting to
      prove it.

.. tacn:: cut @one_term

   Implements the non-dependent case of the :ref:`App <app_rule>` typing rule,
   the Modus Ponens inference rule.  It is equivalent to
   :n:`enough (@ident: @one_term). revert @ident.`
   This tactic is generally considered obsolete but it is still widely
   used in old scripts.

> .. tacn:: pose proof @term {? @as_ipat }

Reviewer: It is strange that this form uses `@term` and not `@one_term` like `pose` (especially given the optional `@as_ipat` clause). I wonder why this is the case and whether restricting the grammar to only accept `@one_term` would create lots of breakage.

> Controlling the proof flow

Reviewer: Probably should appear as variants as well, even if we probably won't dig what they do and document them in this PR.

------------------------------

.. tacn:: assert ( @ident : @term ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          assert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: assert; _

   The first form adds a new hypothesis named :n:`@ident` containing :n:`@term` and
   creates a new subgoal, which becomes the first in the list of subgoals
   remaining to prove.  (This corresponds to the cut rule of sequent calculus.)

   The second form adds a new hypothesis with a name chosen by Coq
   or specified by :n:`@as_ipat`.  If :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is
   applied to the new subgoal.

   :n:`@as_ipat`

>      Gives the name for the hypothesis or specifies how to split it into parts.

Reviewer: Feel free to remove this additional description if you think that's OK.

     See :ref:`intropatterns`.

   :n:`by @ltac_expr3`
     Applies :n:`@ltac_expr3` to solve the subgoal generated by :n:`assert`.

     If not specified, the tactic applies `exact @term` by default where
     :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term` and also equivalent to
     :tacn:`pose proof`.  If the head of term is :token:`ident`, the tactic
     is equivalent to :tacn:`specialize`.

   .. exn:: Not a proposition or a type.

      Arises when the argument :token:`type` is neither of type :g:`Prop`,
      :g:`Set` nor :g:`Type`.

   .. exn:: Proof is not complete.
      :name: Proof is not complete. (assert)

      :n:`@ltac_expr3` was not able to prove the provided :n:`@term` or :n:`@one_term`.

   .. exn:: Variable @ident is already declared.
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: eassert ( @ident : @term ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          eassert @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: eassert; _

   While the different variants of :tacn:`assert` expect that no :term:`existential
   variables <existential variable>` are generated by the tactic, :tacn:`eassert`
   removes this constraint.  This lets you avoid specifying the asserted statement

>    completely before starting to prove it.

Reviewer: Concretely, this means that the statement may contain holes (`_`).

Author: We should talk about holes in general.  IIUC they never appear in the context.  Each hole appearing in `eassert` becomes a new existential variable?  They can also be used for several other purposes (intropatterns, match expressions, lets, function parameters, hints paths, universe levels) and my impression is that implicit arguments (still not well documented) will fill in some of the holes.

Author: For `eassert`, if the term has a `match` with `_` in the pattern, that's not going to be preserved rather than becoming an existential variable.  Right?  Can the condition for replacement be stated concisely?

Reviewer: > Each hole appearing in `eassert` becomes a new existential variable? They can also be used for several other purposes (intropatterns, match expressions, lets, function parameters, hints paths, universe levels) and my impression is that implicit arguments (still not well documented) will fill in some of the holes.

You are right on all of this AFAICT.

> For `eassert`, if the term has a `match` with `_` in the pattern, that's going to be preserved rather than becoming an existential variable, right? Can the condition for replacement be stated concisely?

Actually, `match` with `_` is always elaborated to not use any `_` anymore if I'm not mistaken. But this is indeed, not a hole that creates an existential variable. Holes that correspond to existential variables are the ones which appear in position where a term is expected (not a pattern).

.. tacn:: pose proof @term {? @as_ipat }
          pose proof ( @ident := @term )
   :name: pose proof; _

   The first form behaves like :n:`assert @type {? @as_ipat } by exact @term`
   where :token:`type` is the type of :token:`term`. In particular,
   :n:`pose proof @term as @ident` behaves like :n:`assert (@ident := @term)`
   and :n:`pose proof @term as @simple_intropattern` is the same as applying the
   :token:`simple_intropattern` to :token:`term`.

   The second form is equivalent to :n:`assert (@ident := @term)` and
   :n:`pose proof @term as @ident`, following the model of

>    :n:`pose (@ident := @term)` but dropping the value of :token:`ident`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :n:`pose (@ident := @term)` but dropping the body of :token:`ident`.
```

BTW, another way of saying this is that `pose proof (@ident := @term)` behaves the same as `pose (@ident := @term); clearbody @ident`.

Author: I don't see the point of saying it's equivalent to 3 different things (assert, pose proof and pose).  I think saying it's equivalent to assert is sufficient.  Yes?

Reviewer: Sure, it is sufficient. But my preference (if we want to mention only one thing) would rather be the `pose ; clearbody` thing since it reflects the link between `pose` and `pose proof`. That's not a strong preference though, so your choice.

Author: The description of the first form refers to assert, so IMO best for the second form to also refer to assert.

.. tacn:: epose proof @term {? @as_ipat }
          epose proof ( @ident := @term )
   :name: epose proof; _

   While :tacn:`pose proof` expects that no existential variables are generated by
   the tactic, :tacn:`epose proof` removes this constraint.  The second form

>    is equivalent to an :n:`eassert (@ident := @term)`.

Reviewer: I don't think that repeating the equivalence with (e)assert but just for the second form is worth.

> .. tacn:: enough ( @ident : @term ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. tacn:: enough ( @ident : @type ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
```

BTW, it might make sense to move `enough` and `cut` closer to `assert`.

Author: The only thing in between is pose proof and that's only about 3 inches of text.  I can move pose proof below cut.  Or should it go next to pose?

Reviewer: Yeah, move `pose proof` below `cut`.

          enough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: enough; _

>    Adds a new hypothesis named :token:`ident` asserting :token:`term` to the context
>    and adds :token:`term` as a new subgoal after the current goal (rather than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Adds a new hypothesis named :token:`ident` asserting :token:`type` to the context
   and adds :token:`type` as a new subgoal after the current goal (rather than
```

   before it as :tacn:`assert` would).  If :n:`@ltac_expr3` is specified, it is

>    applied to the new subgoal.

Reviewer: The last sentence is wrong. See the previous doc.

Also, the second form is completely ignored from the description.

The `ltac_expr3` is applied to the *initial* goal with the added assumption, after this assumption has been subjected to the transformation specified by `as_ipat` (if provided) and it should solve this goal entirely (or it will fail).

Author: It's very hard for me to make sense of "wrong" and to figure out exactly what you're referring to in the previous doc.  I've been trying to make sense of this for close to an hour.  See if what I've written is an improvement.

It has to solve _all_ the goals or just the _initial_ goal?

Reviewer: Only the initial goal. Sorry that I was not clear, do not hesitate to ask without spending too much time.

Author: IINM this point is resolved?

.. tacn:: eenough ( @ident : @term ) {? by @ltac_expr3 }
          eenough @one_term {? @as_ipat } {? by @ltac_expr3 }
   :name: eenough; _

   While the different variants of :tacn:`enough` expect that no existential

>    variables are generated by the tactic, :tacn:`eenough` removes this constraint.

Reviewer: And thus, similar to `eassert`, it allows leaving holes in `@type`.

> .. tacn:: cut @one_term

Reviewer: Another way of describing `cut` is that it is equivalent to `enough (@ident: @one_term). revert @ident.` I think the description should note that this tactic is generally considered obsolete and only kept because old scripts depend on it. We could try to deprecate it, but there are hundreds of use, just in the stdlib, so probably not worth.

   .. exn:: @ident is used in conclusion.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: specialize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

> .. tacn:: generalize @one_term {? {+ @one_term } }

Reviewer: Why not the following? (This is equivalent.)
```suggestion
.. tacn:: generalize {+ @one_term }
```

Author: Got it.  I notice this could also  be simplified.  I couldn't remember if this was intentional (perhaps to make grammar unambiguous between the 2nd and 3rd productions).

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/195169095-a9ae8fbe-2446-45cd-8502-4fa0776e6d73.png)

Reviewer: Maybe it comes from how the grammar is defined in the `mlg`, and maybe indeed in this case we prefer to have a non-ambiguous grammar, but I think that for the doc, it would be better to simplify it like you suggest (especially as that won't really change the interpretation of the single `single_intropattern` case, which would be the same whatever form is chosen).

>           generalize @one_term {? at @occs_nums } {? @as_name } {* , @pattern_occs {? @as_name } }

Reviewer: Why not the following? (This is equivalent.)
```suggestion
          generalize {+, @pattern_occs {? @as_name } }
```

Author: Note I moved the `occs_nums` description to `pattern_occs`

Reviewer: > Sure. And then only need a single `:tacn:` here.

Unless I'm mistaken, I don't think so. One form uses comma separators and the other not.

Author: Good point, weird syntax, my bad.

Reviewer: I also find it weird, but I bet there is an explanation. Likely the first form was initially available, but adding new optional clauses made it necessary to have an explicit separator.

Author: A reasonable guess, but it's still unambiguous without any commas.  Though maybe more readable for humans with commas for grouping.

   :name: generalize; _

   For a single :n:`@one_term`, replaces the goal `G` with `forall (x:T), G'`,
   where :n:`@one_term` is a subterm of `G` of type `T` and `G'` is obtained
   by replacing all occurrences of :n:`@one_term` with `x` within `G`.  `x` is

>    a fresh variable chosen based on `T`.  Specifying multiple :n:`one_term`\s is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   a fresh variable chosen based on `T`.  Specifying multiple :n:`@one_term`\s is
```

>    equivalent to :n:`generalize @term__n; … ; generalize @term__1`.  (Note they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   equivalent to :n:`generalize @one_term__n; … ; generalize @one_term__1`.  (Note they
```

   are processed *right to left*.)

   :n:`@occs_nums`
     Selects which occurrences of :n:`@one_term` to replace (counting from
     left to right on the expression printed using the :flag:`Printing All` flag)

   :n:`@as_name`
     The name to use for `x` instead of a fresh name.

   :n:`@pattern_occs`

>      Limits the replacement to terms that match the :n:`@one_term` within :n:`@pattern_occs`.

Reviewer: Where did you get that from?
I think this is just a case of `generalize` being provided several `@one_term` with optional `@occs_nums` clauses.

Author: Yeah, probably wrong, I'll remove it.  BTW, the example just below here looks totally useless.  Perhaps you can suggest a more realistic one?

Reviewer: It's actually not completely useless, since it shows that if you have to prove that some complex arithmetic expression is larger than zero, you can just get rid of the expression and just show that any natural number in general is larger than zero.

But to make the example seem even less useless, maybe you are interested in the rest of the proof:

```
induction n.
- easy.
- now constructor.
```

A proof by induction would be much more complex (if not impossible) without the `generalize` step. And this illustrates well what `generalize` is most useful for: generalizing a statement to the right abstraction level before doing a proof by induction.

Author: Got it, thanks.

   .. example::

      .. coqtop:: reset none

         Goal forall x y:nat, 0 <= x + y + y.
         Proof. intros *.

      .. coqtop:: all abort

         Show.
         generalize (x + y + y).

   .. tacn:: generalize dependent @one_term

      Generalizes :n:`@one_term` and all hypotheses that depend on :n:`@one_term`. It
      clears the generalized hypotheses.

   .. tacn:: dependent generalize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: dependent generalize_eqs_vars @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: generalize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: generalize_eqs_vars @ident
      :undocumented:

> .. tacn:: evar ( @ident : @term )

Author: The second form is a `one_type`?  I can define that as a new nonterminal if we're going to use it in more than 1 or 2 places.

> .. tacn:: evar ( @ident : @term )

Author: OTOH, why did this and the others use `one_term` instead of just `term`?  For `assert`, `by` and `as` are both keywords.  Maybe we should update the mlgs instead?

> .. tacn:: evar ( @ident : @term )

Reviewer: It's true that all these tactics could just as well accept a `term` / `type` without the surrounding parentheses. But I guess there is a bit of tradition in the Coq tactics that they usually take their arguments as `one_term` when they are not already in a context where they are surrounded by parentheses... Feel free to open an issue to discuss this and to keep `one_term` in the meantime (let's just fix the issue I reported about `type` being still used in the description of `elimtype` in that case).

          evar @one_term
   :name: evar; _

   The :n:`evar` tactic creates a new :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`
   named :n:`@ident` with type
   :n:`@term` in the context. The body of this binding is a fresh existential
   variable.

.. tacn:: instantiate {? ( @ident := @term ) }
          instantiate ( @integer := @term ) {? @hloc }
   :name: instantiate; _

   .. insertprodn hloc hloc

   .. prodn::
      hloc ::= in %|- *
      | in @ident
      | in ( type of @ident )
      | in ( value of @ident )

   The no argument form is equivalent to :tacn:`idtac`.
   This form (only) is deprecated in 8.16.

   .. deprecated:: 8.16

>    .. todo PR perhaps we can change the grammar to use "natural"?

Reviewer: Yes, that sounds like a good idea, unless there is some undocumented meaning to using a negative number here (like counting from left to right, maybe?).

Author: Negative values and zero values are not permitted

  if n <= 0 then user_err Pp.(str "Incorrect existential variable index.");

Author: See #16642

      .. coqtop:: all abort

         generalize (x + y + y).   (* get a simpler goal that can be proven by induction *)

   .. tacn:: generalize dependent @one_term

      Generalizes :n:`@one_term` and all hypotheses that depend on :n:`@one_term`. It
      clears the generalized hypotheses.

   .. tacn:: dependent generalize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: dependent generalize_eqs_vars @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: generalize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: generalize_eqs_vars @ident
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: evar ( @ident : @type )
          evar @one_type
   :name: evar; _

   The :n:`evar` tactic creates a new :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`
   named :n:`@ident` with type :n:`@type` or :n:`@one_type` in the context.
   The body of this binding is a fresh existential variable.  If the second
   form is used, Coq chooses the name.

.. tacn:: instantiate {? ( @ident := @term ) }
          instantiate ( @integer := @term ) {? @hloc }
   :name: instantiate; _

   .. insertprodn hloc hloc

   .. prodn::
      hloc ::= in %|- *
      | in @ident
      | in ( type of @ident )
      | in ( value of @ident )

>    .. todo PR perhaps we can change the grammar to use "natural"?

Reviewer: I think this can be removed now:
```suggestion
```

>    .. todo PR: what does the |- * form do?

Reviewer: Same:
```suggestion
```

   .. tacn:: specialize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: generalize {+ @one_term }
          generalize {+, @pattern_occs {? @as_name } }
   :name: generalize; _

>    For each :n:`@one_term` (which may be in the :n:`pattern_occs`), replaces the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For each :n:`@one_term` (which may be in the :n:`@pattern_occs`), replaces the
```

   goal `G` with `forall (x:T), G'`,
   where :n:`@one_term` is a subterm of `G` of type `T` and `G'` is obtained
   by replacing all occurrences of :n:`@one_term` with `x` within `G`.  `x` is
   a fresh variable chosen based on `T`.  Specifying multiple :n:`@one_term`\s is
   equivalent to :n:`generalize @one_term__n; … ; generalize @one_term__1`.
   (Note they are processed *right to left*.)

   :n:`@as_name`
     The name to use for `x` instead of a fresh name.

   .. example::

      .. coqtop:: reset none

         Goal forall x y:nat, 0 <= x + y + y.
         Proof. intros *.

      .. coqtop:: out

         Show.

      .. coqtop:: all abort

>          generalize (x + y + y).   (* get an easier goal to prove *)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         generalize (x + y + y).   (* get a more abstract and simpler goal, that we can now prove by induction *)
```

   .. exn:: @ident is used in conclusion.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: specialize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: hresolve_core ( @ident := @one_term ) {? at @nat_or_var } in @one_term
   :undocumented:

.. tacn:: hget_evar @nat_or_var

>    :undocumented:

Reviewer: I did some commit archeology and found not only the commit that introduced these tactics 028cbb32785b559c637f77864ce5172e0255d0d0, but also https://sf.snu.ac.kr/gil.hur/Hpattern/readme.txt, which explains what they are for. So they seem to be some internal tactics for a library implementing a generalization of `pattern` that is distributed on a website. We should investigate whether this library is actively maintained, still useful, and justifies keeping these tactics / whether it should be integrated into Coq or Coq-community and distributed more widely. In the meantime, I propose to just move these two tactics close to `pattern` and keep this info in a comment.

   .. todo: keep or remove destauto?

.. tacn:: destauto {? in @ident }

>    :undocumented:

Reviewer: Can you preserve the information on the commit that introduced this tactic in the comment? f3a53027589813ff19b3a7c46d84e5bd2fc65741

Author: I added the commit as a comment in the rst and included the description from the source with minor edits (a lousy description is better than none).

   .. exn:: @ident is used in conclusion.
      :undocumented:

   .. tacn:: specialize_eqs @ident
      :undocumented:

.. tacn:: destauto {? in @ident }

   .. todo: keep or remove destauto?
      destauto added in https://github.com/coq/coq/commit/f3a53027589813ff19b3a7c46d84e5bd2fc65741

>    Reduces one match :n:`t` with ... by doing :n:`destruct t`.  If :n:`t` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Reduces one :n:`match t with ...` by doing :n:`destruct t`.  If :n:`t` is
```

             name the variable in the current goal and in the context of the
             existential variable. This can lead to surprising behaviors.

   .. deprecated:: 8.16

      The no argument form is equivalent to :tacn:`idtac`.  This form (only)
      is deprecated in 8.16.

   The second form refines an existential variable selected by its position.  The
   :n:`@natural` argument is the position of the existential variable
   *from right to left* in the goal.  (Use the :n:`@hloc` clause
   to select an existential variable in a
   hypothesis.)  Counting starts at 1 and multiple occurrences of the
   same existential variable are counted multiple times.  Using this form
   is discouraged because slight changes to the goal may change the needed index,
   causing a maintenance issue.

   :n:`in @ident`
     Selects the hypothesis :n:`@ident`.

   :n:`in %|- *`
     Selects the goal.  This is the default behavior.

   :n:`in ( type of @ident )`

>      Selects existential variables in the type given in the

Reviewer: The choice of "a" rather than "the" is just to be consistent with what you've put below. The most important part is writing "type of".

```suggestion
     Selects existential variables in the type of a
```

Author: "type of", got it.  I think "the" is appropriate because ```:term:`local definition <context-local definition>` :n:`@ident` ``` identifies a specific local definition.

   Advanced users may want to define and use an Ltac tactic to get more consistent
   behavior, such as:

   .. coqdoc::

      Ltac instantiate_ltac_variable ev term :=
        let H := fresh in
        pose ev as H;
        instantiate (1 := term) in (value of H);
        clear H.

   :n:`in @ident`
     Selects the hypothesis :n:`@ident`.

   :n:`in %|- *`
     Selects the goal.  This is the default behavior.

   :n:`in ( type of @ident )`
     Selects existential variables in the type of the
     :term:`local definition <context-local definition>` :n:`@ident`.
     (The body is not included.)

   :n:`in ( value of @ident )`
     Selects existential variables in the body of the
     :term:`local definition <context-local definition>` :n:`@ident`.
     (The type is not included.)

.. tacn:: absurd @one_type

   :n:`@one_type` is any proposition
   :g:`P` of type :g:`Prop`. This tactic applies False elimination, that is it
   deduces the current goal from False, and generates as subgoals :g:`∼P` and
   :g:`P`. It is very useful in proofs by cases, where some cases are
   impossible. In most cases, :g:`P` or :g:`∼P` is one of the hypotheses of the
   local context.

> .. tacn:: contradiction {? @one_term_with_bindings }

Reviewer: Leave out the grammar fix until we update the description and merge it with the one of its variant.

```suggestion
.. tacn:: contradiction
```

Author: Note that `doc_grammar` updates the `:tacn:` automatically.  I have to tweak `common.edit_mlg` to avoid that.

             name the variable in the current goal and in the context of the
             existential variable. This can lead to surprising behaviors.

   The second form refines an existential variable selected by its position.  The
   :n:`@natural` argument is the position of the existential variable
   *from right to left* in the goal.  (Use one of
   the variants below to select an existential variable in a
   hypothesis.)  Counting starts at 1 and multiple occurrences of the
   same existential variable are counted multiple times.  Because this
   variant is not robust to slight changes in the goal, its use is

>    strongly discouraged.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should be uniformly discouraging the use of this form.  As far as I'm aware, the ident := form is unusable in automation, because there's no way to get the name of an evar, and the identifier cannot be an Ltac variable holding the evar (I'd very much like to see this implemented...). The robust form for automation, when `ev` is an Ltac variable holding an evar, is `let H := fresh in pose ev as H; instantiate (1 := ltac:(tac)) in (value of H); clear H`.

Author: OK, I changed the last sentence to:

Note that this form is not robust to slight changes in the goal.

Reviewer 3: Hm, I think it is fine to strongly discourage it *in most cases*.  Maybe " strongly discouraged except when you have very carefully set up the evars in the goal " or something?  It might also be worth explicitly mentioning this pattern, which is the robust way to use this variant

Author: @JasonGross Can your ltac statement be turned into an ltac-defined tactic (the `hloc` may be problematic)?  And if not, perhaps it would be good to define a new tactic or new variant that is robust.  Or perhaps we should add a way to get the name of an evar.  Why can't you use the first form?  Or should the first form also support `hloc`?  (But probably not something I would write the code for.)

Your equivalent jumps pretty deep into the details, could be a bit offputting to less experienced users.  Does your trick also works outside of ltac definitions?

> Maybe " strongly discouraged except when you have very carefully set up the evars in the goal " or something?

You only need the second form if you want hloc, right?

FWIW: perhaps it would be worthwhile if you came up with a list of Ltac tricks that could be better addressed by small improvements to tactics.  The best trick is no trick at all :-).

Reviewer: > Your equivalent jumps pretty deep into the details, could be a bit offputting to less experienced users.

IMHO less experienced users should stay away from `instantiate`.

Reviewer 3: I agree.  Maybe there should be some sort of way of marking some tactics, forms, or examples as "for advanced users" or "for tactic automation writers"?

Reviewer: Well, we can do that in the text description. Note that we already mark some of them as "For internal use only."

   :n:`in @ident`
     Selects the hypothesis :n:`@ident`.

   :n:`in %|- *`
     Selects all hypotheses and the goal.

>    .. todo PR above is correct (in |- *)?

Reviewer: If this is consistent with the occurrence clauses documented above, this should be only in the goal, so equivalent to not provided.

Author: You mean the description is correct and I can remove the note?

Reviewer: No, I mean the description should not talk about hypotheses, only the goal. And it could mention that it is the default behavior.

   :n:`in ( type of @ident )`
    Selects existential variables with the type :n:`@ident` in a
    :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`

   :n:`in ( value of @ident )`

>     Selects existential variables that have type :n:`@ident` in the body of
>     a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Selects existential variables in the body (thus excluding the type) of
    a :term:`local definition <context-local definition>` :n:`@ident`
```

.. tacn:: admit

   This tactic allows temporarily skipping a subgoal so as to
   progress further in the rest of the proof. A proof containing admitted
   goals cannot be closed with :cmd:`Qed` but only with :cmd:`Admitted`.

   :tacn:`give_up` is a synonym for `admit`.

> .. todo PR: is give_up worth keeping?  See proof-mode.rst

Reviewer: I think it's completely fine to have synonyms. However, the description of the two tactics should be merged. I think the current location of `give_up` is the right one.

.. tacn:: absurd @one_term

   The argument term is any proposition
   :g:`P` of type :g:`Prop`. This tactic applies False elimination, that is it
   deduces the current goal from False, and generates as subgoals :g:`∼P` and
   :g:`P`. It is very useful in proofs by cases, where some cases are
   impossible. In most cases, :g:`P` or :g:`∼P` is one of the hypotheses of the
   local context.

.. tacn:: contradiction {? @one_term_with_bindings }

   Tries to prove the current goal by finding a contradiction, such as
   a hypothesis that is equivalent to `False` (from which any conclusion
   can be proven).  This could also be (after all intros) a hypothesis that is

>    the negation of a singleton inductive type (e.g. :g:`True` or :g:`x=x`),

Reviewer: The "negation of a singleton inductive type" case does not correspond to the behavior I observe when testing. And something that the current description omits seems to be that if the provided argument is the proof of a negation, then the tactic replaces the current goal by a goal asking to prove the non-negated statement.

Example:

```coq
Goal ~True -> forall A : Prop, A.
intro H.
contradiction H. (* Goal: True *)
```

Author: > The "negation of a singleton inductive type" case does not correspond to the behavior I observe when testing.

Can you be more specific?  That doesn't work or it should say something stronger?

I really know very little about the tactic, perhaps you could provide text or bullet points (and an example or two, if appropriate)?  It would probably take considerable experimentation and guesswork on my part to figure it out.

Reviewer: > That doesn't work or it should say something stronger?

I would say that it works, but it is just incorrectly documented (it has always worked like this, at least since 8.6).

> I really know very little about the tactic, perhaps you could provide text or bullet points (and an example or two, if appropriate)? It would probably take considerable experimentation and guesswork on my part to figure it out.

Sure, I can do that.

- `contradiction` without argument looks in the local context for either `False` or (most common case) two hypotheses, one which is the negation of the other.
- `contradiction` with an argument will solve the goal if it is a proof of `False` and ask for a proof of the non-negated statement if it is a proof of a negated statement but fail with "not a contradiction" if it is neither (I'm saying this based on my examples).
- We could review the various uses of `contradiction` in the stdlib, but a first thing to note is that the form with an argument is quite unusual.

I'll add examples later on.

> .. tacn:: classical_left

Reviewer: Above, can you make `Require Import` a link to the command?

> .. todo: move the following adjacent to the `exact` tactic in the rewriting chapter?

Reviewer: `exact` is not in the rewriting chapter, it is in the current chapter.

              native_cast_no_check I.
            Fail Qed.

.. tacn:: destauto {? in @ident }

>    :undocumented:

Reviewer: For some reason, you seem to have added this tactic twice to this chapter.

BTW, this tactic was introduced in f3a53027589813ff19b3a7c46d84e5bd2fc65741. It is not used in the stdlib and was never documented, so it's probably not much used. We should decide if we want to document it or remove it, but it seems useful.
